birds2024.csv

This data describes some bird species that occur in Finland. The data
has been gathered from various sources (ornithology books, NatureGate
https://luontoportti.com/en, wikipedia, and other articles) and
translated and postprocessed by Wilhelmiina Hämäläinen 2023-24,
including some external consultation. The intention is to extend the
data later to be used for other purposes. The current version can be
used in the Methods of Data Mining (Aalto University) 2024 exercise
tasks, but you are not allowed to publish or deliver the data. Note
that the data may contain errors or inaccuracies in biological facts
and is not meant as an ornithological guide.

Features
---------

The fields are the following:

species - Finnish name, works as a row identifier (not needed in the analysis)
group - biological group, see the taxonomy below
length - body length (cm)
wspan - wing span (cm)
weight - weight (g)
AR - wing aspect ratio is the ratio of wing length and wing width (*)
wload - wing loading is the ratio of body mass and wing area (*)
back - main colour of the back
belly - main colour of the belly
ftype - flying type (category A, B, C)

Notes: The colours refer to the female bird. The AR and wload measures
and flying types are based on Vincze et al. (2019).

Hint: When using numerical values, you can decide
wheather to use the minimum or maximum value of the range or some mid
value. Instead of absolute values, it may be more informative to
calculate body weight index, BMI=weight/length^2, and wing span index,
WSI=wspan/length (to describe how slim or long-winged the bird is).

When using colour variables, you can use the simple overlap similarity
(or corresponding distance), but it will punish for any difference in
the shades.  You will probably get better results, if you design your
own distance function that assigns smaller distance for similar
colours mentioning the same main colour (e.g., "light grey" and
"bluish grey" or "dark brown" and "brown").


Taxonomy
--------

Here is taxonomy that describes the biological groupings of the listed
species. There are birds from 8 orders that are divided to families
and possibly subfamilies.  The data gives the most specific grouping
(family or subfamily), from which you can derive a more general group.

1. Charadriiformes (shorebirds)
1.1 Lari (gulls and terns)
1.1.1 Laridae (lokit, gulls)
1.1.2 Sternidae (tiirat, terns)
1.2 Charadrii (kahlaajat, waders)
1.2.1 Scolopacidae (kurpat, sandpipers etc)
1.2.2 Charadriidae (kurmitsat, plovers etc)
1.2.3 Haematopodidae (meriharakat, oystercatchers)
2. Anatidae (ducks, geese, swans)
2.1 Anatinae (varsinaiset sorsat, ducks)
2.1.1 dabbling ducks
2.1.2 diving ducks
2.2 Anserinae (hanhet ja joutsenet, geese and swans)
3. Gruiformes
3.1 Gruidae (kurjet, cranes)
3.2 Rallidae (rantakanat, rails)
4. Phalacrocoracidae (merimetsot, cormorants)
5. Podicipedidae (uikut, grebes)
6. Gaviidae (kuikat, loons)
7. Ardeidae (haikarat, herons)
8. Accipitriformes (päiväpetolinnut, diurnal birds of prey) 
8.1 Accipitridae (hawks, eagles, kites, harriers)



References
-----------

Vincze et al. (2019): Wing morphology, flight type and migration
distance predict accumulated fuel load in birds. Experimental Biology
222, https://doi.org/10.1242/jeb.183517

